# TypeTuner

## Installation

To install TypeTuner, download the files in this repo and place them a folder called `/typetuner/` in your Sass folder. Add `@import 'typetuner/typetuner';` to your primary Sass file before you need to reference any font-sizes generated by this plugin.

## Usage

### Setting Variables

To configure TypeTuner for your project, declare the following variables and maps in your Sass project *before importing TypeTuner*.

#### Type Sizes

The list `$fsizes` contains a list of names for all the type sizes you'll need for your project. This can be whatever titles you like, just be sure to list them from smallest to largest. 

**Examples:**

`$fsizes: (small, medium, large, extra-large);`
`$fsizes: (alpha, beta, gamma);`
`$fsizes: (guppy, bluegill, bass, marlin, shark);`
`$fsizes: (small, p, h6, h5, h4, h3, h2, h1);`

**Default:**

`$fsizes: (sm, p, bq, ssh, sh, h, hero);`

#### Add "Small" Size

If you want to add a small type size (one step down from base on the scale in use), set:

`$startsmall: true;`

This is the default value.

#### Breakpoints

This plugin currently uses three maps to store breakpoint-related data. Please don't get too attached to this: it might change to a single map of nested maps for simplicity's sake. Until further notice, however, please set the following maps

##### Media Queries

The `$breakpoints` map contains breakpoint names (entirely up to you) and the measurement to set a `min-width` media query.

**Default:**

```
$breakpoints: (
	default: 20em,
	medium: 37.5em,
	large: 68em,
	xlarge: 82em
);
```

##### Base Font Sizes

If you'd like to set a different base font size per breakpoint, use the `$bp-fs` map to connect breakpoint names (the same ones used in `$breakpoints`) with font sizes.

**Default:**

```
$bp-fs: (
	default: 16px,
	medium: 18px,
	large: 21px,
	xlarge: 23px
);
```

##### Type Scales

Set a musical scale for type to follow at each breakpoint in `$bp-scales`. This map connects breakpoint names (again, from `$breakpoints`) to the names of musical scales found in `/variables/_musical-scales.scss`. As a general rule, select scales with more intervals for smaller screens: scales with fewer intervals will iterate and grow more quickly, creating larger sizes that take advantage of larger screens.

**Default:**

```
$bp-scales: (
  default: $hexatonic,
  medium: $pentatonic,
  large: $quad,
  xlarge: $major-triad
);
```

### Extending Output

When TypeTuner runs its `resp-sizes()` mixin (which it does by default in `_typetuner.scss`, it will generate a series of silent placeholder selectors (`%sm {}`, `%p {}`, etc). To use these sizes in your project, `@extend` them in the appropriate selectors. Remember that font sizes inherit, so be careful not to over-`@extend` yourself. :)